New Page About Balances & Locks (#5859)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-account-balances.md

---
id: learn-account-balances

> title: Polkadot's Account Balances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Account Balances
```

sidebar_label: Account Balances

> description: Polkadot's Account Balance Types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Polkadot and Kusama Network Account Balance Types.
```

> keywords: [Polkadot, locks, balance, account]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keywords: [Polkadot, Kusama, locks, balance, account]
```

slug: ../learn-account-balances
---

In {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} there are different types of
balance depending on the account activity. Different balance types indicate whether your balance can

> be used for transfers, to pay fees, or must remain frozen and unused due to an on-chain requirement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}, there are different types of
balances depending on the account activity. Different balance types dictate whether your balance can
be used for transfers, to pay fees, or must remain frozen and unused due to an on-chain requirement.
```

> :::info A more efficient use of wallet balances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info A more efficient distribution of account balance types
```

Soon, Polkadot SDK pallets will implement the _fungible_ trait (see

> [Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html) for more info about traits). This

Reviewer: Better to point to the fungible trait reference docs for further info, than to the definition of traits.

```suggestion
[Reference docs](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/traits/tokens/fungible/index.html) for more info about traits). This
```

> new logic will allow for more efficient use of your wallet balance. Specifically, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new logic will allow for more efficient use of your account balance. Specifically, the
```

[fungible trait](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/1833#issuecomment-1805764506)
will allow using the `free` balance for on-chain activity like setting proxies and identities.

:::

> There are 5 types of balances:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 5 types of account balances:
```

> - **Free** is the balance is the balance that can be used for on-chain activity but is not

Reviewer: Clarifying what on-chain activity entails with relatable examples

```suggestion
- **Free** is the balance that can be used for on-chain activity like staking, participating in governance etc. but is not
```

  necessarily spendable (or transferrable)
- **Frozen** is the free balance locked for [staking](./learn-staking.md),
  [governance](./learn-polkadot-opengov.md), and [vesting](./learn-transactions.md#vested-transfers)
  (also called locked balance)
- **On hold** is used for [identities](./learn-identity.md), [proxies](./learn-proxies.md),
  [OpenGov preimages and deposits](./learn-guides-polkadot-opengov.md#claiming-opengov-deposits),
  and it is no longer free (also called reserved balance)
- **Spendable** is the free balance that can be spent
- **Untouchable** is the portion of the free balance that cannot be moved (i.e., not spendable) but
  can still be used for on-chain activity

The spendable balance is calculated as follows:

```
spendable = free - max(frozen - on_hold, ED)
```

where `free`, `frozen` and `on_hold` are defined above. The `ED` is the the
[existential deposit](./learn-accounts.md#existential-deposit-and-reaping).

**Wallet providers might show you the spendable, locked, and reserved balance.**

> ## Example of Wallet Balance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example of Account Balance Types
```

> Below is an in-depth example of how a wallet balance composition changes depending on user actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an in-depth example of how an account balance composition changes depending on user actions once [the _fungible_ trait](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/traits/tokens/fungible/index.html) is used for account balances.
```

> Let’s take, for example, a wallet with 100 DOT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s take, for example, an account with 100 DOT.
```

```
Free: 100 DOT
Frozen: 0 DOT
On hold: 0 DOT
Spendable: 99 DOT
Untouchable: 1 DOT (ED)
```

![balance-example-1](../assets/balance-example-1.png)

In this case, the existential deposit of 1 DOT is untouchable (meaning you can’t touch it if the

> account can’t or shouldn’t get reaped). We stake 80 DOT, and we get the following balance structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
account can’t or shouldn’t get reaped). If 80 DOT from the account is staked, we get the following balance structure:
```

```
Free: 100 DOT
Frozen : 80 DOT
Onhold: 0 DOT
Spendable: 20 DOT
Untouchable: 80 DOT
```

![balance-example-2](../assets/balance-example-2.png)

> The spendable balance would be 20 DOT (- transaction fees).

Reviewer: The transaction fee is part of the spendable balance. I think the idea you wanted to convey was that transaction fees would be deducted from the free balance.

```suggestion
The spendable balance would be 20 DOT (which would also include fees for future transactions from this account).
```

existence of such an account). For example, the existential deposit adds a provider reference simply
because the account exists, while a proxy account adds a consumer reference (the proxy existence
depends on the proxied account; the proxy is the consumer). **Because the existential deposit is
part of the untouchable balance, the user can use all the spendable balance (there is no need to
keep 1 DOT as spendable).**

If the account creates a proxy, it will use the `free` balance as shown below.

```
Free: 80 DOT
Frozen : 80 DOT
Onhold: 20 DOT
Spendable: 20 DOT
Untouchable: 60 DOT
```

![balance-example-3](../assets/balance-example-3.png)

**Note how (through the fungible trait) the system uses the `balance` that is frozen instead of the
`free` balance that is spendable (present situation).** In other words, holds are subtracted from
free but overlap with the frozen balance. The free portion shrinks from 100 to 80 DOT, and the
`on_hold` portion increases from 0 to 20 DOT. The creation of an identity will grow the `on_hold`
portion to 40 DOT, and shrink further the `free` from 80 to 60 DOT. Note how the spendable balance

> stays the same in the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note how, through the fungible trait, the system uses the `balance` that is frozen instead of the
`free` balance that is spendable (present configuration on-chain).** In other words, holds are subtracted from
free balance but overlap with the frozen balance. The free portion shrinks from 100 to 80 DOT, and the
`on_hold` portion increases from 0 to 20 DOT. The creation of an identity will grow the `on_hold`
portion to 40 DOT, and shrink further the `free` from 80 to 60 DOT. Note how the spendable balance
stays the same in the process.
```

```
Free: 60 DOT
Frozen: 80 DOT
Onhold: 40 DOT
Spendable: 20 DOT
Untouchable: 40 DOT
```

![balance-example-4](../assets/balance-example-4.png)

This update using the fungible trait allows the use of the frozen balance for on-chain activity like
setting up proxies and identities. Note that
[holds are slashable](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/12951), and the pallet
[migrations](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/226) need to take that into account.

> This means that freezes should account for hold being slashed (for example, your stash getting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that freezes should account for hold being slashed (for example, your stash account balance getting
```

reduced because your governance deposit for a proposal was slashed).

## Locks

Locks are an abstraction over free balance that prevent spending for certain purposes. Several locks
can operate on the same account but overlap rather than add. Locks are automatically added onto
accounts when tasks are done on the network (e.g., leasing a parachain slot or voting), these are

> not customizable.

Reviewer: Removing reference to parachain slot lease which will be soon deprecated. Also, rephrasing for clarity. 

```suggestion
Locks are abstractions over an account's free balance, preventing it from being spent. Several locks
can overlap on the same account balance instead of being stacked on top of one another. Locks are automatically added onto
accounts when the account participates in activities on-chain (staking, voting, etc.), but these are
not customizable.
```

Locks account for the `frozen` balance of your wallet. This is the balance that can be `free` but
not transferrable, and locked on [staking](./learn-staking.md),

> [governance](./learn-polkadot-opengov.md) and [vesting](./learn-transactions.md#vested-transfers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locks are accounted for within the `frozen` balance of the account. This is the balance that can be `free` but
not transferrable, and locked in [staking](./learn-staking.md),
[governance](./learn-polkadot-opengov.md) and [vesting](./learn-transactions.md#vested-transfers).
```

> Locks overlap (in both size and time), and the general rule is that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locks overlap (in both amount and duration), and the general rule is that:
```

- If you have multiple locks of different sizes, the biggest lock decides the total amount of locked

>   tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have multiple locks of different amounts of tokens, the biggest lock decides the total amount of locked
  tokens
```

- If you have multiple locks of the same size, the longest lock decides when all the tokens can be

>   unlocked

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have multiple locks of the same amount of tokens, the lock with the longest duration decides when those tokens can be
  unlocked
```

Let's take, for example, 80 DOT as a `frozen` balance. These 80 DOT are currently used in staking
and governance as follows:

- 80 DOT Staking (just unbonded) -> lock 28 days
- 24 DOT OpenGov 1x conviction (referendum just ended, winning side) -> lock 7 days
- 4 DOT OpenGov 6x conviction (referendum just ended, winning side) -> lock 224 days

![locks-example-1](../assets/locks-example-1.png)

The 1 DOT ED is the existential deposit. The locked amount is 80 DOT (not 108 DOT). But those 80 DOT
will be available for unlock at different times. You will first need to remove the governance lock
on the 24 DOT after 7 days, then remove the staking lock for the 80 DOT after 28 days, and finally,
after 224 days, you will be able to remove the second governance lock.

![locks-example-2](../assets/locks-example-2.png)

After 224 days, all 80 DOT (- ED) will be free and transferrable.

> ### Edge Cases for Overlocking

Reviewer: Is overlocking a widely used term, or are we introducing it here for the first time?

Author: first time, I can change it to something else like "repeated locks"?

> The longest period and the largest amount are considered if you used different convictions. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The longest period and the largest amount are considered if you use different convictions. This is
```

  vested transfers (see below). In the example, the transferrable balance is 0.0106 KSM.
- The **vested** balance indicates tokens sent to the account and released with a specific time
  schedule. The account owns the tokens, but they are _locked_ and become available for transfer
  after a specific number of blocks. In the example, the vested balance is 0.25 KSM.
- The **bonded** balance indicates the number of tokens that are _locked_ for on-chain participation
  to staking. In the example, the bonded balance is 0.4 KSM.
- The **democracy** balance indicates the number of tokens that are _locked_ for on-chain
  participation in democracy (i.e., voting for referenda and council). In the example, the democracy
  balance is 0.4 KSM.
- The **redeemable** balance indicates the number of tokens ready to be unlocked to become
  transferrable again. Those tokens already went through the unbonding period. In this case, the
  redeemable balance is 0.1 KSM.
- The **locked** balance indicates the number of frozen tokens for on-chain participation to staking
  and democracy or for vested transfers. **Locks do not stack**, which means that if you have

>   different locks the total locked balance is not the addition of all single locks. Instead, **the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  different locks, the total locked balance is not the addition of the individual locks. Instead, **the
```
